Improve tuning docs (#3031)
tenzir/vast: web/docs/setup/tune.md

This section describes tuning knobs that have a notable effect on system
performance.

## Batching

VAST processes events in batches. Because the structured data has the shape of a
table, we call these batches *table slices*. The following options control their
shape and behavior.

> Internally, VAST implements a table slice as an Arrow *record batch*.

Reviewer: I think this is a meaningless implementation detail for tuning. Let's just remove this sentence.

from the input will block. After the read timeout elapses, VAST tries again at a
later. The default value is 10 seconds.

## Storage Engine

The central component of VAST's storage engine is the *catalog*. It owns the

> partitions, keeps meta data about them, and maintains a set of sparse secondary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
partitions, keeps metadata about them, and maintains a set of sparse secondary
```

indexes to identify relevant partitions for a given query. In addition, a
partition can have a set of dense secondary indexes in addition to the raw data
stored.

![Multi-Tier Indexing](multi-tier-indexing.excalidraw.svg)

The catalog's secondary indexes are space-efficient sketch data structures
(e.g., Bloom filters, min-max summaries) that have a low memory footprint but
may yield false positives. VAST keeps all sketches in memory.

The amount of memory that the storage engine can consume is not explicitly
configurable, but there exist various options that have a direct impact.

### Control the partition size

VAST groups table slices with the same schema in a partition. There exist
mutable *active partitions* that VAST writes to during ingestion, and immutable
*passive partitions* that VAST reads from during query execution.

> When constructing a partition, the parameter `vast.max-partition-size` sets an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When constructing a partition, the parameter `vast.max-partition-size` (defaults to 4 Mi) sets an
```

upper bound on the number of records in a partition, across all table slices.

> The parameter `vast.active-partition-timeout` provides a time-based upper bound:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parameter `vast.active-partition-timeout` (defaults to 10 s) provides a time-based upper bound:
```

once reached, VAST considers the partition as complete, regardless of the number
of records.

The two parameters are decoupled to allow for independent control of throughput

> and freshness.

Reviewer: This should also mention that VAST automatically merges undersized partitions over time, which makes the amortized performance penalty for choosing a lower active partition timeout zero.

### Tune partition caching

VAST maintains a LRU cache of partitions to accelerate queries involving recent

> partitions. The parameter `vast.max-resident-partitions` controls the number of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
partitions. The parameter `vast.max-resident-partitions` (defalts to 10) controls the number of
```

partitions in the LRU cache.

:::note
Run `vast flush` to force VAST to write all active partitions to disk
immediately. The command returns only after all active partitions were flushed
to disk.
:::

### Tune number of sketches and their sizes

The catalog's memory usage is a function of the stored data. The configuration

> option `max-partition-size` determines an upper bound of the number of records
> per partition, which is inversely linked to the number of sketches in the
> catalog. That means increasing the `max-partition-size` is an effective method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
option `vast.max-partition-size` determines an upper bound of the number of records
per partition, which is inversely linked to the number of sketches in the
catalog. That means increasing the `vast.max-partition-size` is an effective method
```

to reduce the memory requirements for the catalog.

### Tune sketch parameters

A false positive during a sparse index lookup can have a noticeable impact on the
query latency by materializing irrelevant partitions. Based on the cost of I/O,
this penalty may be substantial. Conversely, reducing the false positive rate
increases the memory consumption, leading to a higher resident set size and
larger RAM requirements.

You can control this space-time trade-off in the configuration section

> `vast.index` by specifying index *rules*. Each rule configures one sketch and

Reviewer: Each entry in that list configures potentially multiple catalog or partition indexes, as a rule can refer to multiple targets. Essentially, it allows for:
- Enabling field-specific catalog indexes per extractor (off by default)
- Changing the false-positive rate of catalog indexes per extractor or type for catalog indexes that support a false-positive rate
- Disabling partition indexes for a given extractor

I think there are quite a few holes in that design, but let's document what we got as that is not the current focus.

Author: I rewrote the indexing section to reflect this. Please resolve if this works.

        partition-index: false
```

### Select the store format

VAST arranges data in horizontal partitions for sharding. Each partition has a
unique schema and is effectively a concatenation of batches. The *store* inside
a partition holds this data and can have multiple formats:

1. **Feather**: writes Apache Feather V2 files
2. **Parquet**: writes [Apache Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) files

VAST defaults to the `feather` store. To use the Parquet store, adjust
`vast.store-backend`:

```yaml
vast:
  plugins:
    - parquet
  store-backend: parquet
```

There's an inherent space-time tradeoff between the stores that affects CPU,
memory, and storage characteristics. Compared to the Feather store, Parquet
differs as follows:

1. Parquet files occupy ~40% less space, which also reduces I/O pressure during
   querying.

> 2. Parquet utilizes more CPU cycles during ingest (~10%) and querying.

Reviewer: Note that the Feather store behaves much better with queries that end early, because it allows for queries to be stopped early within a store, while our Parquet store only allows for stopping a query early after every store that has been evaluated. This is the primary reason why Parquet is not the default. Now while that is entirely fixable for Parquet, we simply haven't had the time to do so. We should caution about this, because for many parallel queries this makes a really large performance difference and improves latencies and responsiveness throughout the system.

Author: Added a note.

Parquet has the major advantage that it's the de-facto standard for encoding
columnar data in modern data architectures. This allows other applications that
support reading from Parquet *native* access to the data.

:::tip Recommendation

Use Parquet when:

1. Storage is scarce, and you want to increase data retention
2. Workloads are I/O-bound and you have available CPU
3. Reading data with with off-the-shelf data science tools is a use case

For an in-depth comparison, take a look at our [blog post on Feather and
Parquet](/blog/parquet-and-feather-writing-security-telemetry).
:::

VAST supports [rebuilding the entire database](#rebuild-partitions) in case you
want to switch to a different store format. However, VAST works perfectly fine
with a mixed-storage configuration, so a full rebuild is not required.

### Adjust the store compression

VAST compresses partitions using Zstd for partitions at rest. To fine-tune
the space-time trade-off, VAST offers a setting, `vast.zstd-compression-level`
to allow fine-tuning the compression level:

```yaml
vast:
  zstd-compression-level: 1
```

Currently, the default value is taken from Apache Arrow itself, using

> `arrow::util::Codec::DefaultCompressionLevel(arrow::Compression::ZSTD)`

Reviewer: I think this is too much of an implementation detail; if you want to keep it, I would rather link to the documentation of the function than just giving its signature, which is rather meaningless.

Link to docs: https://arrow.apache.org/docs/cpp/api/utilities.html#_CPPv4N5arrow4util5Codec26UseDefaultCompressionLevelEv

VAST defaults to the `feather` store. To use the Parquet store, adjust
`vast.store-backend`:

```yaml
vast:
  plugins:
    - parquet
  store-backend: parquet
```

There's an inherent space-time tradeoff between the stores that affects CPU,
memory, and storage characteristics. Compared to the Feather store, Parquet
differs as follows:

1. Parquet files occupy ~40% less space, which also reduces I/O pressure during
   querying.
2. Parquet utilizes more CPU cycles during ingest (~10%) and querying.

Parquet has the major advantage that it's the de-facto standard for encoding
columnar data in modern data architectures. This allows other applications that
support reading from Parquet *native* access to the data.

:::tip Recommendation

Use Parquet when:

1. Storage is scarce, and you want to increase data retention
2. Workloads are I/O-bound and you have available CPU
3. Reading data with with off-the-shelf data science tools is a use case

For an in-depth comparison, take a look at our [blog post on Feather and
Parquet](/blog/parquet-and-feather-writing-security-telemetry).

One final word of caution: a query over a Parquet store is currently not

> interruptible and executes over the entire store. This is an deficiency in our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interruptible and executes over the entire store. This is a deficiency in our
```

```

To stop an ongoing rebuild, use the `vast rebuild stop` command.

## Shutdown

The `stop` command gracefully brings down a VAST server that has been started
with the `start` command.

It is also possible to send a signal `SIGINT(2)` to the `vast` process instead
of using `vast stop`, but in only works on the same machine that runs the
server process. We recommend using `vast stop`, as it also works over the wire.

The `stop` command blocks until the server process has terminated, and returns
a zero exit code upon success, making it suitable for use in launch system

> scripts.

Reviewer: This is not true: The `stop` command blocks until the node actor shut down in the node, which is by definition before the process shut down. Using it in scripting via `vast stop && vast start` is not possible because of that, as there would still be a VAST process running.

(One way to fix this from our side would be to remove the PID lock as part of the node actor shut down, but that's a fix for another day.)

Author: Can you suggest rewording? I only copied this text to a different location and your comment doesn't is too low-level for me to derive a meaningful user-facing action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `stop` command asks the server process to terminate gracefully, and returns
a zero exit code upon success, making it suitable for use in launch system scripts.
```

:::note
The server waits for ongoing import processes to terminate before shutting down
itself. In case an import process is hanging, you can always terminate the
hanging process manually to shutdown the server.

> :::

Reviewer: This is more of a "known bug" that we simply haven't been able to fix, but hopefully will go away implicitly with the pipeline-first efforts. I think we should rephrase it or remove it.
